<h3><a id="A-Rocket-of-Iron">A Rocket of Iron</a></h3>


<p>It was one of those misty October nightfalls of the
north, when the white fog creeps up from the
river, and winds itself like a corpse-sheet around
the black, ant-like mass of human insignificance, a
cold menace from Nature to Man, till the foreboding
of that irresistible fatality which will one day lay us
all beneath the ice-death sits upon your breast, and
stifles you, till you start up desperately crying, "Let
me out, let me out!"</p>

<p>For an hour I had been staring through the window
at that chill steam, thickening and blurring out the
lines that zig-zagged through it indefinitely, pale
drunken images of facts, staggering against the invulnerable
vapor that walled me in—a sublimated grave
marble. Were they all ghosts, those figures wandering
across the white night, hardly distinguishable
from the posts and pickets that wove in and out, like
half-dismembered bodies writhing in pain? My own
fingers were curiously numb and inert; had I, too,
become a shadow?</p>

<p>It grew unbearable at last, the pressure of the foreboding
at my heart, the sense of that on-creeping of
Universal Death. I ran out of doors, impelled by the
vague impulse to assert my own being, to seek relief
in struggle, even though foredoomed futile—to seek
warmth, fellowship, somewhere, though but with those
ineffective pallors in the mist, that dissolved even
while I looked at them. Once in the street, I ran
on indifferently, glad to be jostled, glad of the snarling
of dogs and the curses of laborers calling to one
another. The penumbra of the mist, that menacing
dim foreshadow, had not chilled these, then! On, on,
through the alleys where human flesh was close, and
when one listened one could hear breathings and many
feet, drifting at last into the current that swept
through the main channel of the city, and presently,
whirled round in an eddy, I found myself staring
through the open door of the great Iron Works. Perhaps
it was the sensation of warmth that held me
there first, some feeling of exhilaration and wakening
defiance in the flash and swirl of the yellow flames—this,
mixed with an indistinct desire to clutch at something,
anything, that seemed stationary in the midst
of all this that slipped and wavered and fell away....
No, I remember now: there was something before
that; there was a sound—a sound that had stopped
my feet in their going, and smote me with a long
shudder—a sound of hammers, beating, beating, beating
a terrific hail, momentarily faster and louder, and
in between a panting as of some great monster catching
breath beneath the driving of that iron rain.
Faster, faster—<span class="smcap">clang</span>! A long reverberant shriek!
The giant had rolled and shivered in his pain. Involuntarily
I was drawn down into the Valley of the
Sound, words muttering themselves through my lips
as I passed: "Forging, forging—what are they forging
there? Frankenstein makes his Monster. How
the iron screams!" But I heard it no more now; I
only saw!—saw the curling yellow flames, and the
red, red iron that panted, and the Masters of the
Hammers. How they moved there, like demons in
the abyss, their bodies swinging, their eyes tense and
a-glitter, their faces covered with the gloom of the
torture-chamber!</p>

<p>Only <i>one</i> face I saw, young and fair—young and
very fair—whereon the gloom seemed not to settle.
The skin of it was white and shining there in the
midst of that black haze; over the wide forehead fell
tumbling waves of thick brown hair, and two great
dark eyes looked steadily into the red iron, as if they
saw therein something I did not see; only now and
then they were lifted, and looked away upward, as if
beyond the smoke-pall they beheld a vision. Once he
turned so that the rose-light cast forth his profile as a
silhouette; and I shivered, it was so fine and hard!
Hard with the hardness of beaten iron, and fine with
the fineness of a keen chisel. Had the hammers been
beating on that fair young face?</p>

<p>A comrade called, a sudden terrified cry. There
was a wild rush, a mad stampede of feet, a horrible
screech of hissing metal, and a rocket of iron shot
upward toward the black roof, bursting and falling in
a burning shower. Three figures lay writhing along
the floor, among the leaping, demoniac sparks.</p>

<p>The first to lift them was the Man with the white
face. He had stood still in the storm, and ran forward
when the others shrank back. Now he passed by me,
bearing his dying burden, and I saw no quiver upon
brow or chin; only, when he laid it in the ambulance,
I fancied I saw upon the delicate curved lips a line
of purpose deepen, and the reflection of the iron-fire
glow in the strange eyes, as if for an instant the door
of a hidden furnace had been opened and smouldering
coals had breathed the air. And even then he
looked up!</p>

<p>It was all over in half an hour. There would be
weeping in three little homes; and one was dead, and
one would die, and one would crawl, a seared human
stump, to the end of his weary days. The crowd that
had gathered was gone; they would not know the
Stump when it begged from them with its maimed
hands, six months after, on some street corner.
"Fakir" they would say, and laugh. There would be
an entry on the company's books, and a brief line in
the newspapers next day. But the welding of the
iron would go on, and the man who gave his easy
money for it would fancy he had paid for it, not seeing
the stiff figures in their graves, nor the crippled beggar,
nor the broken homes.</p>

<p>The rocket of iron is already cold; dull, inert, fireless,
the black fragments lie upon the floor whereon
they lately rained their red revenge. Do with them
what you will, you cannot undo their work. The men
are clearing way. Only he with the white face does
not go back to his place. Still set and silent he takes
his coat, "presses his soft hat down upon his thick,
damp locks," and goes out into the fog and night. So
close he passed me, I might have touched him; but
he never saw me. Perhaps he was still carrying the
burden of the dying man upon his heart; perhaps
some mightier burden. For one instant the shapely,
boyish figure was in full light, then it vanished away
in the engulfing mist—the mist which the vision of
him had made me forget. For I knew I had seen a
Man of Iron, into whose soul the iron had driven,
whose nerves were tempered as cold steel, but behind
whose still, impassive features slumbered a white-hot
heart. And others should see a rocket and a ruin, and
feel the Vengeance of Beaten Iron, before the mist
comes and swallows all.</p>

<hr class="tb" />

<p>I had forgotten! Upon that face, that young, fair
face, so smooth and fine that even the black smoke
would not rest upon it, there bloomed the roses of
Early Death. Hot-house flowers!</p>






<h3><a id="The-Chain-Gang">The Chain Gang</a></h3>


<p>It is far, far down in the southland, and I am back
again, thanks be, in the land of wind and snow,
where life lives. But that was in the days when
I was a wretched thing, that crept and crawled, and
shrunk when the wind blew, and feared the snow. So
they sent me away down there to the world of the sun,
where the wind and the snow are afraid. And the sun
was kind to me, and the soft air that does not move lay
around me like folds of down, and the poor creeping life
in me winked in the light and stared out at the wide
caressing air; stared away to the north, to the land of
wind and rain, where my heart was,—my heart that
would be at home.</p>

<p>Yes, there, in the tender south, my heart was bitter
and bowed, for the love of the singing wind and the frost
whose edge was death,—bitter and bowed for the
strength to bear that was gone, and the strength to love
that abode. Day after day I climbed the hills with my
face to the north and home. And there, on those southern
heights, where the air was resin and balm, there
smote on my ears the sound that all the wind of the
north can never sing down again, the sound I shall hear
till I stand at the door of the last silence.</p>

<p>Cling—clang—cling—From the Georgian hills it
sounds; and the snow and the storm cannot drown it,—the
far-off, terrible music of the Chain Gang.</p>



<p>I met it there on the road, face to face, with all the
light of the sun upon it. Do you know what it is? Do
you know that every day men run in long procession,
upon the road they build for others' safe and easy going,
bound to a chain? And that other men, with guns upon
their shoulders, ride beside them—with orders to kill
if the living links break? There it stretched before me,
a serpent of human bodies, bound to the iron and
wrapped in the merciless folds of justified cruelty.</p>

<p>Clank—clink—clank—There was an order given. The
living chain divided; groups fell to work upon the road;
and then I saw and heard a miracle.</p>

<p>Have you ever, out of a drowsy, lazy conviction that
all knowledges, all arts, all dreams, are only patient
sums of many toils of many millions dead and living,
suddenly started into an uncanny consciousness that
knowledges and arts and dreams are things more real
than any living being ever was, which suddenly reveal
themselves, unasked and unawaited, in the most obscure
corners of soul-life, flashing out in prismatic
glory to dazzle and shock all your security of thought,
toppling it with vague questions of what is reality, that
you cannot silence? When you hear that an untaught
child is able, he knows not how, to do the works of the
magicians of mathematics, has it never seemed to you
that suddenly all books were swept away, and there
before you stood a superb, sphinx-like creation, Mathematics
itself, posing problems to men whose eyes are
cast down, and all at once, out of whim, incorporating
itself in that wide-eyed, mysterious child? Have you
ever felt that all the works of the masters were swept
aside in the burst of a singing voice, unconscious that
it sings, and that Music itself, a master-presence, has
entered the throat and sung?</p>



<p>No, you have never felt it? But you have never heard
the Chain Gang sing!</p>

<p>Their faces were black and brutal and hopeless; their
brows were low, their jaws were heavy, their eyes were
hard; three hundred years of the scorn that brands had
burned its scar upon the face and form of Ignorance,—Ignorance
that had sought dully, stupidly, blindly, and
been answered with that pitiless brand. But wide beyond
the limits of high man and his little scorn, the great,
sweet old Music-Soul, the chords of the World, smote
through the black man's fibre in the days of the making
of men; and it sings, it sings, with its ever-thrumming
strings, through all the voices of the Chain Gang. And
never one so low that it does not fill with the humming
vibrancy that quivers and bursts out singing things always
new and new and new.</p>

<p>I heard it that day.</p>

<p>The leader struck his pick into the earth, and for a
moment whistled like some wild, free, living flute in the
forest. Then his voice floated out, like a low booming
wind, crying an instant, and fell; there was the measure
of a grave in the fall of it. Another voice rose up, and
lifted the dead note aloft, like a mourner raising his
beloved with a kiss. It drifted away to the hills and the
sun. Then many voices rolled forward, like a great
plunging wave, in a chorus never heard before, perhaps
never again; for each man sung his own song as it
came, yet all blent. The words were few, simple, filled
with a great plaint; the wail of the sea was in it; and
no man knew what his brother would sing, yet added
his own without thought, as the rhythm swept on, and
no voice knew what note its fellow voice would sing, yet
they fell in one another as the billow falls in the trough
or rolls to the crest, one upon the other, one within the
other, over, under, all in the great wave; and now one
led and others followed, then it dropped back and another
swelled upward, and every voice was soloist and chorister,
and never one seemed conscious of itself, but only to
sing out the great song.</p>

<p>And always, as the voices rose and sank, the axes
swung and fell. And the lean white face of the man with
the gun looked on with a stolid, paralyzed smile.</p>

<p>Oh, that wild, sombre melody, that long, appealing
plaint, with its hope laid beyond death,—that melody
that was made only there, just now, before me, and
passing away before me! If I could only seize it, hold
it, stop it from passing! that all the world might hear
the song of the Chain Gang! might know that here, in
these red Georgian hills, convicts, black, brutal convicts,
are making the music that is of no man's compelling,
that floods like the tide and ebbs away like the tide, and
will not be held—and is gone, far away and forever, out
into the abyss where the voices of the centuries have
drifted and are lost!</p>

<p>Something about Jesus, and a Lamp in the darkness—a
gulfing darkness. Oh, in the mass of sunshine must
they still cry for light? All around the sweep and the
glory of shimmering ether, sun, sun, a world of sun, and
these still calling for light! Sun for the road, sun for the
stones, sun for the red clay—and no light for this dark
living clay? Only heat that burns and blaze that blinds,
but does not lift the darkness!</p>

<p>"And lead me to that Lamp——"</p>

<p>The pathetic prayer for light went trembling away
out into the luminous gulf of day, and the axes swung
and fell; and the grim dry face of the man with the gun
looked on with its frozen smile. "So long as they sing,
they work," said the smile, still and ironical.</p>



<p>"A friend to them that's got no friend"—Man of
Sorrows, lifted up upon Golgotha, in the day when the
forces of the Law and the might of Social Order set
you there, in the moment of your pain and desperate
accusation against Heaven, when that piercing "Eloi,
Eloi, lama sabachthani?" went up to a deaf sky, did you
presage this desolate appeal coming to you out of the
unlived depths of nineteen hundred years?</p>

<p>Hopeless hope, that cries to the dead! Futile pleading
that the cup may pass, while still the lips drink! For,
as of old, Order and the Law, in shining helmets and
gleaming spears, ringed round the felon of Golgotha, so
stand they still in that lean, merciless figure, with its
shouldered gun and passive smile. And the moan that
died within the Place of Skulls is born again in this great
dark cry rising up against the sun.</p>

<p>If but the living might hear it, not the dead! For these
are dead who walk about with vengeance and despite
within their hearts, and scorn for things dark and lowly,
in the odor of self-righteousness, with self-vaunting wisdom
in their souls, and pride of race, and iron-shod
order, and the preservation of Things that Are; walking
stones are these, that cannot hear. But the living are
those who seek to know, who wot not of things lowly
or things high, but only of things wonderful; and who
turn sorrowfully from Things that Are, hoping for
Things that May Be. If these should hear the Chain
Gang chorus, seize it, make all the living hear it,
see it!</p>

<p>If, from among themselves, one man might find "the
Lamp," lift it up! Paint for all the world these Georgian
hills, these red, sunburned roads, these toiling figures
with their rhythmic axes, these brutal, unillumined faces,
dull, groping, depth-covered,—and then unloose that
song upon their ears, till they feel the smitten, quivering
hearts of the Sons of Music beating against their own;
and under and over and around it, the chain that the
dead have forged clinking between the heart-beats!</p>

<p>Clang—cling—clang—ng—It is sundown. They
are running over the red road now. The voices are
silent; only the chain clinks.</p>






<h3><a id="The-Heart-of-Angiolillo">The Heart of Angiolillo</a></h3>


<p>Some women are born to love stories as the sparks
fly upward. You see it every time they glance
at you, and you feel it every time they lay a finger
on your sleeve. There was a party the other night, and
a four-year old baby who couldn't sleep for the noise
crept down into the parlor half frightened to death and
transfixed with wonderment at the crude performances
of an obtuse visitor who was shouting out the woes of
Othello. One kindly little woman took the baby in her
arms and said: "What would they do to you, if you
made all that noise."—"Whip me," whispered the child,
her round black eyes half admiration and half terror,
and altogether coquettish, as she hid and peered round
the woman's neck. And every man in the room forthwith
fell in love with her, and wanted to smother his
face in the bewitching rings of dark hair that crowned
the dainty head, and carry her about on his shoulders, or
get down on his hands and knees to play horse for her,
or let her walk on his neck, or obliterate his dignity in
any other way she might prefer. The boys tolerated
their fathers with a superior "huh!" Fourteen or fifteen
years from now they will be playing the humble cousin
of the horse before the same little ringed-haired lady,
and having sported Nick Bottom's ears to no purpose,
half a dozen or so will go off and hang themselves, or
turn monk, or become "bold, bad men," and revenge
themselves on the sex. But her conquests will go on,
and when those gracious rings are white as snow the
children of those boys will follow in their grandfathers'
and fathers' steps and dangle after her, and make drawings
on their fly leaves of that sweet kiss-cup of a mouth
of hers, and call her their elder sister, and other devotional
names. And the other girls of her generation,
who were not born with that marvelous entangling grace
in every line and look, will dread her and spite her, and
feel mean satisfaction when some poor fool does swallow
laudanum on her account. Smiles of glacial virtue will
creep over their faces like slippery sunshine, when one
by one her devotees come trailing off to them to say that
such a woman could never fill a man's heart nor become
the ornament of his hearthstone; the quiet virtues that
wear, are all their desire; of course they have just been
studying her character and that of the foolish men who
dance her attendance, but even those are not doing it
with any serious motives. And the neglected girls will
serve him with home-made cake and wine which he will
presently convert into agony in that pearl shell ear of
hers. And all the while the baby will have done nothing
but be what she was born to be through none of her own
choosing, which is her lot and portion; and that is another
thing the gods will have to explain when the day
comes that they go on trial before men; which is the real
day of judgment.</p>

<p>But this isn't the baby's story, which has yet to be
made, but the story of one who somehow received a
wrong portion. Some inadvertent little angel in the
destiny shop took down her name when the heroine of
a romance was called for, and put her where she shouldn't
have been, and then ran off to play no doubt, not stopping
to look twice. For even the most insouciant angel
that looked twice would have seen that Effie was no
woman to play the game of hearts, and there's only one
thing more undiscerning than an angel, and that is a social
reformer. Effie ran up against both.</p>

<p>They say she had blood in her girlhood, that it shone
red and steady through that thin, pure skin of hers; but
when I saw her, with her nursing baby in her arms,
down in the smutching grime of London, there was only
a fluctuant blush, a sort of pink ghost of blood, hovering
back and forth on her face. And that was for shame of
the poverty of her neat bare room. Not that she had
ever known riches. She was the daughter of Scotch
peasants, and had gone out to service when she was still
a child; her chest was hollowed in and her back bowed
with that unnatural labor. There was no gloss on the
pale sandy hair, no wilding tendrils clinging round the
straight smooth forehead, no light of coquetry or grace
in the glimmering blue eyes, no beauty in her at all, unless
it lay in the fine, hard sculptured line of her nose
and mouth and chin when she turned her head sideways.
You could read in that line that having spoken a word to
her heart, she would not forget it nor unsay it; and if it
took her down into Gethsemane, she would never cry
out though by all forsaken.</p>

<p>And that was where it had taken her then. Some
ready condemner of all that has been tried for less than
a thousand years, will say it was because she had the
just reward of those who, holding that love is its own
sanction and that it cannot be anything but degraded by
seeking permissions from social authorities, live their love
lives without the consent of Church and State. But
you and I know that the same dark garden has awaited
the woman whose love has been blessed by both, and that
many such a life lamp has flickered out in a night as
profound as poverty and utter loneliness could make it.
So if it was justice to Effie, what is it to that other woman?
In truth, justice had nothing to do with it; she
loved the wrong man, that was all; and married or unmarried,
it would have been the same, for a formula
doesn't make a man, nor the lack of it unmake him.
The fellow was superior in intellect. It is honesty only
which can wring so much from those who knew them
both, for as to any other thing she sat as high over him
as the stars are. Not that he was an actively bad man;
just one of those weak, uncertain, tumbling about characters,
having sense enough to know it is a fine thing
to stand alone, and vanity enough to want the name
without the game, and cowardice enough to creep around
anything stronger than itself, and hang there, and spread
itself about, and say, "Lo, how straight am I!" And
if the stronger thing happens to be a father or a brother
or some such tolerant piece of friendly, self-sufficient
energy, he amuses himself awhile, and finally gives the
creeper a shake and says, "Here, now, go hang on somebody
else if you can't stand alone", and the world says
he should have done it before. But if it happens to be
a mother or a sister or a wife or a sweetheart, she encourages
him to think he is a wonderful person, that all
she does is really his own merit, and she is proud and
glad to serve him. If after a while she doesn't exactly
believe it any more, she says and does the same; and
the world says she is a fool,—which she is. But if, in
some sudden spurt of masculine self-assertiveness, she
decides to fling him off, the world says she is an unwomanly
woman,—which again she is; so much the
better.</p>

<p>Effie's creeper dabbled in literature. He wanted to be
a translator and several other things. His appearance
was mild and gentlemanly, even super-modest. He always
spoke respectfully of Effie, and as if momentously
impressed with a sense of duty towards her. They had
started out to realize the free life together, and the glory
of the new ideal had beckoned them forward. So no
doubt he believed, for a pretender always deceives himself
worse than anybody else. But still, at that particular
period, he used to droop his head wearily and admit
that he had made a great mistake. It was nobody's fault
but his own, but of course—Effie and he were hardly
fitted for each other. She could not well enter into
his hopes and ambitions, never having had the opportunity
to develop when she was younger. He had hoped
to stimulate her in that direction, but he feared it was
too late. So he said in a delicate and gentlemanly way,
as he went from one house to the other, and was invited
to dinner and supper and made himself believe he was
looking for work. Effie, meanwhile, was taking home
boys' caps to make, and worrying along incredibly on
bread and tea, and walking the streets with the baby in her
arms when she had no caps to make.</p>

<p>Of course when a man drinks other people's teas
a great many times, and sits in their houses, and
borrows odd shillings now and then, and assumes the
gentleman, he is ultimately brought to the necessity of
asking some one to tea with him; so one spring night the
creeper approached Effie rather dubiously with the statement
that he had asked two or three acquaintances to
come in the next evening, and he supposed she would need
to prepare tea. The girl was just fainting from starvation
then, and she asked him wearily where he thought
she was to get it. He cast about a while in his pusillanimous
way for things that <i>she</i> might do, and finally proposed
that she pawn the baby's dress,—the white dress
she had made from one of her own girlhood dresses,
and the only thing it had to wear when she took it out
for air. That was the limit, even for Effie. She said
she would take anything of her own if she had it, but
not the baby's; and she turned her face to the wall and
clung to the child.</p>

<p>When the tea-time came next day she went out with
the baby and walked up and down the surging London
streets looking in the windows and crushing back tears.
What the creeper did with his guests she never knew,
for she did not return till long after dusk, when she was
too weary to wander any more, and she found no one
there but himself and a dark stranger, who spoke little
and with an Italian accent, but who measured her with
serious, intense eyes. He listened to the creeper, but he
looked at her; she was quite fagged out and more bloodless
than ever as she sat motionless on the edge of the
bed. When he went away he lifted his hat to her with
the grace of an old time courtier, and begged her pardon
if he had intruded. Some days after that he came in
again, and brought a toy for the baby, and asked her if
he might carry the child out a little for her; it looked
sickly shut up there, but he knew it must be heavy for
her to carry. The creeper suddenly discovered that he
could carry the baby.</p>

<p>All this happened in the days when a pious queen sat
on the throne of Spain. With eyes turned upward in
much holiness, she failed to see the things done in her
prisons, or hear the groans that rose up from the "zero"
chamber in the fortress of Montjuich, though all Europe
heard, and even in America the echo rang. While she told
her beads her minister gave the order to "torture the Anarchists";
and scarred with red-hot irons, maimed and
deformed and maddened with the nameless horrors that
the good devise to correct the bad, even unto this day
the evidences of that infamous order live. But two men
do not live,—the one who gave the order, and the one
who revenged it.</p>

<p>It happened one night, in April, that Effie and
the creeper and their sometime visitor met all three in
one of those long low smothering London halls where
many movements have originated, which in their developed
proportions have taken possession of the House of
Commons, and even stirred the dust in the House of
Lords. There was a crowd of excited people talking
all degrees of sense and nonsense in every language of
the continent. Letters smuggled from the prison had
been received; new tales of torture were passing from
mouth to mouth; fresh propositions to arouse a general
protest from civilization were bubbling up with the anger
of every indignant man and woman. Drifting to
the buzzing knots Effie heard some one translating: it
was the letter of the tortured Noguès, who a month
later was shot beneath the fortress wall. The words
smote her ears like something hot and stinging:</p>

<blockquote>

<p>"You know I am one of the three accusers (the other
two are Ascheri and Molas) who figure in the trial.
I could not bear the atrocious tortures of so many days.
On my arrest I spent eight days without food or drink,
obliged to walk continually to and fro or be flogged;
and as if that did not suffice, I was made to trot as
though I were a horse trained at the riding school, until
worn with fatigue I fell to the ground. Then the
hangmen burnt my lips with red-hot irons, and when I
declared myself the author of the attempt they replied,
'You do not tell the truth. We know that the author
is another one, but we want to know your accomplices.
Besides you still retain six bombs, and along with little

Oller you deposited two bombs in the Rue Fivaller.
Who are your accomplices?'</p>

<p>"In spite of my desire to make an end of it I could
not answer anything. Whom should I accuse since all
are innocent? Finally six comrades were placed before
me, whom I had to accuse, and of whom I beg pardon.
Thus the declarations and the accusations that I made....
I cannot finish; the hangmen are coming.</p>

<p class="right elbow-room">Noguès."</p>

</blockquote>

<p>Sick with horror Effie would have gone away, but her
feet were like lead. She heard the next letter, the
pathetic prayer of Sebastian Sunyer, indistinctly; the
tortures had already seared her ears, but the crying for
help seemed to go up over her head like great sobs; she
felt herself washed round, sinking, in the desperate pain
of it. The piteous reiteration, "Listen you with your
honest hearts," "you with your pure souls," "good and
right-minded people," "good and right-feeling people,"
wailed through her like the wild pleading of a child who,
shrieking under the whip "Dear papa, good, sweet papa,
please don't whip me, please, please," seeks terror-wrung
flattery to escape the lash. The last cry, "Aid us in our
helplessness; think of our misery," made her quiver like
a reed. She walked away and sat down in a corner
alone; what could she do, what could any one do? Miserable
creature that she was herself, her own misery
seemed so worthless beside that prison cry. And she
thought on, "Why does he want to live at all, why does
any one want to live, why do I want to live myself?"</p>

<p>After a while the creeper and his friend came to her,
and the latter sat down beside her, undemonstrative as
usual. At the next buzz in the room they two were left
alone. She looked at him once as she said, "What do
you think the people will do about it?"</p>



<p>He glanced at the crowd with a thin smile: "Do?
Talk."</p>

<p>In a little time he said quietly: "It does you no good
here. I will take you home and come back for David
afterward." She had no idea of contradicting him; so
they went out together. At the threshold of her room
he said firmly, "I will come in for a few minutes; I have
to speak to you."</p>

<p>She struck a light, put the baby on the bed, and looked
at him questioningly. He had sat down with his back
against the wall, and with rigidly folded arms stared
straight ahead of him. Seeing that he did not speak, she
said softly, falling into her native dialect, as all Scotch
women do when they feel most: "I canna get thae poor
creetyer's cries oot o' ma head. It's no human."</p>

<p>"No," he said shortly, and then with a sudden look at
her, "Effie, what do you think love is?"</p>

<p>She answered him with surprised eyes and said nothing.
He went on: "You love the child, don't you? You
do for it, you serve it. That shows you love it. But do
you think it's love that makes David act as he does to
you? If he loved you, would he let you work as you
work? Would he live off you? Wouldn't he wear the
flesh off his fingers instead of yours? He doesn't love
you. He isn't worth you. He isn't a bad man, but he
isn't worth you. And you make him less worth. You
ruin him, you ruin yourself, you kill the child. I can't
see it any more. I come here, and I see you weaker
every time, whiter, thinner. And I know if you keep
on you'll die. I can't see it. I want you to leave him;
let me work for you. I don't make much, but enough
to let you rest. At least till you are well. I would wait
till you left him of yourself, but I can't wait when I see
you dying like this. I don't want anything of you, except
to serve you, to serve the child because it's yours.
Come away, to-night. You can have my room; I'll go
somewhere else. To-morrow I'll find you a better
place. You needn't see him any more. I'll tell him
myself. He won't do anything, don't be afraid. Come."
And he stood up.</p>

<p>Effie had sat astonished and dumb. Now she looked
up at the dark tense eyes above her, and said quietly,
"I dinna understand."</p>

<p>A sharp contraction went across the strong bent face:
"No? You don't understand what you are doing with
yourself? You don't understand that I love you, and
I can't see it? I don't ask you to love me; I ask you to
let me serve you. Only a little, only so much as to give
you health again; is that too much? You don't know
what you are to me. Others love beauty, but I—I see in
you the eternal sacrifice; your thin fingers that always
work, your face—when I look at it, it's just a white
shadow; you are the child of the people, that dies without
crying. Oh, let me give myself for you. And leave
this man, who doesn't care for you, doesn't know you,
thinks you beneath him, uses you. I don't want you to
be his slave any more."</p>

<p>Effie clasped her hands and looked at them; then she
looked at the sleeping baby, smoothed the quilt, and said
quietly: "I didna take him the day to leave him the
morra. It's no my fault if ye're daft aboot me."</p>

<p>The dark face sharpened as one sees the agony in a
dying man, but his voice was very gentle, speaking always
in his blurred English: "No, there is no fault in
you at all. Did I accuse you?"</p>

<p>The girl walked to the window and looked out. Some
way it was a relief from the burning eyes which seemed
to fill the room, no matter that she did not look at them.
And staring off into the twinkling London night, she
heard again the terrible sobs of Sebastian Sunyer's letter
rising up and drowning her with its misery. Without
turning around she said, low and hard, "I wonder ye
can thenk aboot thae things, an' yon deils burnin' men
alive."</p>

<p>The man drew his hand across his forehead. "Would
you like to hear that they,—one,—the worst of them,
was dead?"</p>

<p>"I thenk the worl' wadna be muckle the waur o't," she
answered, still looking away from him. He came up and
laid his hand on her shoulder. "Will you kiss me once?
I'll never ask again." She shook him off: "I dinna feel
for't." "Good-bye then. I'll go back for David." And
he returned to the hall and got the creeper and told him
very honestly what had taken place; and the creeper, to
his credit be it said, respected him for it, and talked a
great deal about being better in future to the girl. The
two men parted at the foot of the stairs, and the last
words that echoed through the hallway were: "No, I
am going away. But you will hear of me some day."</p>

<p>Now, what went on in his heart that night no one
knows; nor what indecision still kept him lingering fitfully
about Effie's street a few days more; nor when the
indecision finally ceased; for no one spoke to him after
that, except as casual acquaintances meet, and in a week
he was gone. But what he did the whole world knows;
for even the Queen of Spain came out of her prayers to
hear how her torturing prime minister had been shot at
Santa Agueda, by a stern-faced man, who, when the
widow, grief-mad, spit in his face, quietly wiped his
cheek, saying, "Madam, I have no quarrel with women."
A few weeks later they garrotted him, and he said one
word before he died,—one only, "Germinal."</p>

<p>Over there in the long low London hall the gabbling
was hushed, and some one murmured how he had sat
silent in the corner that night when all were talking.
The creeper passed round a book containing the history
of the tortures, watching it jealously all the while, for
said he, "Angiolillo gave it to me himself; he had it in
his own hands."</p>

<p>Effie lay beside the baby in her room, and hid her face
in the pillow to keep out the stare of the burning eyes
that were dead; and over and over again she repeated,
"Was it my fault, was it my fault?" The hot summer
air lay still and smothering, and the immense murmur of
the city came muffled like thunder below the horizon.
Her heart seemed beating against the walls of a padded
room. And gradually, without losing consciousness, she
slipped into the world of illusion; around her grew the
stifling atmosphere of the torture-chamber of Montjuich,
and the choked cries of men in agony. She was sure that
if she looked up she should see the demoniac face of
Portas, the torturer. She tried to cry, "Mercy, mercy,"
but her dry lips clave. She had a whirling sensation,
and the illusion changed; now there was the clank of
soldiers' arms, a moment of insufferable stillness as the
garrotte shaped itself out of the shadows in her eyes,
then loud and clear, breaking the sullen quiet like the
sharp ringing of a storm-bringing wind, "Germinal."
She sprang up: the long vibration of the bell of St.
Pancras was waving through the room; but to her it was
the prolongation of the word, "Germ-inal-l-l—germinal-l-l—"
Then suddenly she threw out her arms in the
darkness, and whispered hoarsely, "Ay, I'll kiss ye the
noo."</p>

<p>An hour later she was back at the old question, "Was
it my fault?"</p>

<p>Poor girl, it is all over now, and all the same to the
grass that roots in her bone, whether it was her fault or
not. For the end that the man who had loved her foresaw,
came, though it was slow in the coming. Let the
creeper get credit for all that he did. He stiffened up in
a year or so, and went to Paris and got some work; and
there the worn little creature went to him, and wrote to
her old friends that she was better off at last. But it
was too late for that thin shell of a body that had starved
so much; at the first trial she broke and died. And so she
sleeps and is forgotten. And the careless boy-angel who
mixed all these destinies up so unobservantly has never
yet whispered her name in the ear of the widowed Lady
Canovas del Castillo.</p>

<p>Nor will the birds that fly thither carry it now; for
<i>it was not "Effie."</i></p>






<h3><a id="The-Reward-of-an-Apostate">The Reward of an Apostate</a></h3>


<p>I have sinned: and I am rewarded according to my
sin, which was great. There is no forgiveness for
me; let no man think there is forgiveness for sin:
the gods cannot forgive.</p>

<p>This was my sin, and this is my punishment, that I
forsook my god to follow a stranger—only a while, a
very brief, brief while—and when I would have returned
there was no more returning. I cannot worship any
more,—that is my punishment; I cannot worship any
more.</p>

<p>Oh, that my god will none of me? That is an old sorrow!
My god was Beauty, and I am all unbeautiful,
and ever was. There is no grace in these harsh limbs
of mine, nor was at any time. I, to whom the glory of
a lit eye was as the shining of stars in a deep well, have
only dull and faded eyes, and always had; the chiseled
lip and chin whereover runs the radiance of life in bubbling
gleams, the cup of living wine was never mine to
taste or kiss. I am earth-colored, and for my own
ugliness sit in the shadow, that the sunlight may not
see me, nor the beloved of my god. But, once, in my
hidden corner, behind the curtain of shadows, I blinked
at the glory of the world, and had such joy of it as only
the ugly know, sitting silent and worshiping, forgetting
themselves and forgotten. Here in my brain it glowed,
the shimmering of the dying sun upon the shore, the
long gold line between the sand and sea, where the sliding
foam caught fire and burned to death. Here in my
brain it shone, the white moon on the wrinkling river,
running away, a dancing ghost line in the illimitable
night. Here in my brain rose the mountain curves, the
great still world of stone, summit upon summit sweeping
skyward, lonely and conquering. Here in my brain,
my little brain, behind this tiny ugly wall of bone
stretched over with its dirty yellow skin, glittered the
far high blue desert with its sand of stars, as I have
watched it, nights and nights, alone, hid in the shadows
of the prairie grass. Here rolled and swelled the seas of
corn, and blossoming fields of nodding bloom; and
flower-flies on their hovering wings went flickering up
and down. And the quick spring of lithe-limbed things
went scattering dew across the sun; and singing streams
went shining down the rocks, spreading bright veils upon
the crags.</p>

<p>Here in my brain, my silent unrevealing brain, were
the eyes I loved, the lips I dared not kiss, the sculptured
heads and tendriled hair. They were here always in my
wonder-house, my house of Beauty, the temple of my
god. I shut the door on common life and worshiped
here. And no bright, living, flying thing, in whose body
Beauty dwells as guest, can guess the ecstatic joy of a
brown, silent creature, a toad-thing, squatting on the
shadowed ground, self-blotted, motionless, thrilling with
the presence of All-Beauty, though it has no part therein.</p>

<p>But the gods are many. And once a strange god
came to me. Sharp upon the shadowy ground he stood,
and beckoned me with knotted fingers. There was no
beauty in his lean figure and sunken cheeks; but up and
down the muscles ran like snakes beneath his skin, and
his dark eyes had somber fires in them. And as I looked
at him, I felt the leap of prisoned forces in myself, in the
earth, in the air, in the sun; all throbbed with the pulse
of the wild god's heart. Beauty vanished from my
wonder-house; and where his images had been I heard
the clang and roar of machinery, the forging of links
that stretched to the sun, chains for the tides, chains
for the winds; and curious lights went shining through
thick walls as through air, and down through the shell
of the world itself, to the great furnaces within. Into
those seething depths, the god's eyes peered, smiling and
triumphing; then with an up-glance at the sky and a
waste-glance at me, he strode off.</p>

<p>This is my great sin, for which there is no pardon:
I followed him, the rude god Energy; followed him, and
in that abandoned moment swore to be quit of Beauty,
which had given me nothing, and to be worshiper of
him to whom I was akin, ugly but sinuous, resolute, daring,
defiant, maker and breaker of things, remoulder of
the world. I followed him, I would have run abreast
with him; I loved him, not with that still ecstasy of
flooding joy wherewith my own god filled me of old,
but with impetuous, eager fires, that burned and beat
through all the blood-threads of me. "I love you, love
me back," I cried, and would have flung myself upon
his neck. Then he turned on me with a ruthless blow,
and fled away over the world, leaving me crippled,
stricken, powerless, a fierce pain driving through my
veins—gusts of pain!—And I crept back into my old
cavern, stumbling, blind and deaf, only for the haunting
vision of my shame and the rushing sound of fevered
blood.</p>

<p>The pain is gone. I see again; I care no more for
the taunt and blow of that fierce god who was never
mine. But in my wonder-house it is all still and bare;
no image lingers on the blank mirrors any more. No
singing bell floats in the echoless dome. Forms rise
and pass; but neither mountain curve nor sand nor sea,
nor shivering river, nor the faces of the flowers, nor
flowering faces of my god's beloved, touch aught within
me now. Not one poor thrill of vague delight for me,
who felt the glory of the stars within my finger tips. It
slips past me like water. Brown without and clay within!
No wonder now behind the ugly wall; an empty temple!
I cannot worship, I cannot love, I cannot care. All my
life-service is unweighed against that faithless hour of
my forswearing.</p>

<p>It is just; it is the Law; I am forsworn, and the gods
have given me the Reward of An Apostate.</p>






<h3><a id="At-the-End-of-the-Alley">At the End of the Alley</a></h3>


<p>It is a long narrow pocket opening on a little street
which runs like a tortuous seam up and down the
city, over there. It was at the end of the summer;
and in summer, in the evening, the mouth of the pocket
is hard to find, because of the people, in it and about,
who sit across the passage, gasping at the dirty winds
that come loafing down the street like crafty beggars
seeking a hole to sleep in—like mean beggars, bereft of
the spirit of free windhood. Down in the pocket itself
the air is quite dead; one feels oneself enveloped in a
scum-covered pool of it, and at every breath long filaments
of invisible roots, swamp-roots, tear and tangle in
your floundering lungs.</p>

<p>I had to go to the very end, to the bottom of the pocket.
There, in the deepest of these alley-holes, lives the woman
to whom I am indebted for the whiteness of this waist I
wear. How she does it, I don't know; poverty works
miracles like that, just as the black marsh mud gives out
lilies.</p>

<p>At the very last door I knocked, and presently a man's
voice, weak and suffocated, called from a window above.
I explained.—"There's a chair there; sit down. She'll
be home soon." And the voice was caught in a cough.</p>

<p>This, then, was the consumptive husband she had told
me of! I looked up at the square hole dimly outlined in
the darkness, whence the cough issued, and suddenly felt
a horrible pressure at my heart and a curious sense of
entanglement, as if all the invisible webs of disease had
momentarily acquired a conscious sense of prey within
their clutch, and tightened on it like an octopus. The
haunting terror of the unknown, the dim horror of an
inimic Presence, recoil before the merciless creeping and
floating of an enemy one cannot grasp or fight, repulsive
turning from a Thing that has reached behind while you
have been seeking to face it, that is there awaiting you
with the frightful ironic laughter of the Silence—all this
swept round and through me as I stared up through the
night.</p>

<p>Up there on the bed he was lying, he who had been
meshed in the fatal web for three long years—and was
struggling still! In the darkness I felt his breath draw.</p>

<p>The sharp barking of a dog came as a relief. I turned
to the broken chair, and sat down to wait. The alley was
hemmed in by a high wall, and from the farther side of
it there towered up four magnificent old trees, whose
great crowns sent down a whispering legend of vanished
forests and the limitless sweep of clean air that had
washed through them, long ago, and that would never
come again. How long, how long since those far days
of purity, before the plague spot of Man had crept upon
them! How strong those proud old giants were that had
not yet been strangled! How beautiful they were! How
mean and ugly were the misshapen things that sat in the
doorways of the foul dens that they had made, chattering,
chattering, as ages ago the apes had chattered in the forest!
What curious beasts they were, with their paws and
heads sticking out of the coverings they had twisted
round their bodies—chattering, chattering always, and
always moving about, unable to understand the still strong
growths of silence.</p>

<p>So a half hour passed.</p>

<p>At last I saw a parting in the group of bodies across
the entrance of the pocket, and a familiar weary figure
carrying a basket, coming down the brickway. She
stopped half way where a widening of the alley furnished
the common drying place, and a number of clothes lines
crossed and recrossed each other, casting a net of shadows
on the pavement; after a glance at the sky, which
had clouded over, she sighed heavily and again advanced.
In the sickly light of the alley lamp the rounded shoulders
seemed to droop like an old crone's. Yet the woman
was still young. That she might not be startled, I called
"Good evening."</p>

<p>The answer was spoken in that tone of forced cheerfulness
which the wretched always give to their employers;
but she sank upon the step with the habitual "My,
but I'm glad to sit down," of one who seldom sits.</p>

<p>"Tired out, I suppose. The day has been so hot."</p>

<p>"Yes, and I've got to go to work and iron again till
eleven o'clock, and it's awful hot in that kitchen. I don't
mind the washing so much in summer; I wash out here.
But it's hot ironing. Are you in a hurry?"</p>

<p>I said no, and sat on. "How much rent do you pay?"
I asked.</p>

<p>"Seven dollars."</p>

<p>"Three rooms?"</p>

<p>"Yes."</p>

<p>"One over the other?"</p>

<p>"Yes. It's an awful rent, and he won't fix anything.
The door is half off its hinges, and the paper is a sight."</p>

<p>"Have you lived here long?"</p>

<p>"Over three years. We moved here before he got sick.</p>



<p>I don't keep nothing right now, but it used to be nice.
It's so quiet back here away from the street; you don't
hear no noise. That fence ought to be whitewashed. I
used to keep it white, and everything clean. And it was
so nice to sit out here in summer under them trees. You
could just think you were in the park."</p>

<p>A curious wonder went through me. Somewhere back
in me a voice was saying, "To him that hath shall be
given, and from him that hath not, it shall be taken away
even that which he hath." This horrible pool had been
"nice" to her! Again I felt the abyss seizing me with
its tentacles, and high overhead in the tree-crowns I
seemed to hear a spectral mockery of laughter.</p>

<p>"Yes," I forced myself to say, "they are splendid trees.
I wonder they have lived so long."</p>

<p>"'Tis funny, aint it? That's a great big yard in there;
the man that used to own it was a gardener, and there's
a lot of the curiousest flowers there yet. But he's dead
now, and the folks that's got it don't keep up nothing.
They're waiting to sell it, I suppose."</p>

<p>Above, over our heads, the racking cough sounded
again. "Aint it terrible?" she murmured. "Day and
night, day and night; he don't get no rest, and neither do
I. It's no wonder some people commits suicide."</p>

<p>"Does he ever speak of it?" I asked. Her voice
dropped to a semi-whisper. "Not now so much, since
the church people's got hold of him. He used to; I
think he'd a done it if it hadn't been for them. But
they've been kind o' talkin' to him lately, and tellin' him
it wouldn't be right,—on account of the insurance, you
know."</p>

<p>My heart gave a wild bound of revolt, and I shut
my teeth fast. O man, man, what have you made of yourself!
More stupid than all the beasts of the earth, for a
dole of the things you make to be robbed of, living,—to
be robbed of and poisoned with—you consent to the
death that eats with a million mouths, eats inexorably.
You submit to unnamable torture in the holy name of—Insurance!
And in the name of Insurance this miserable
woman keeps alive the bones of a man!</p>

<p>I took my bundle and went. And all the way I felt
myself tearing through the tendrils of death that hung
and swayed from the noisome wall, and caught at
things as they passed. And all the way there pressed
upon me pictures of the skeleton and the woman, clothed
in firm flesh, young and joyous, and thrilling with the
love of the well and strong. Ah, if some one had said to
her then, "Some day you will slave to keep him alive
through fruitless agonies, that for your last reward you
may take the price of his pain"!</p>


<h4 title="II. Alone"><a id="Alone">II.—ALONE</a></h4>

<p>I was wrong. I thought she wanted the insurance
money, but I misunderstood her. I found it out
one wild October day more than a year later, when
for the second time I sought the end of the alley.</p>

<p>The sufferer had "suffered out"; the gaunt and
wasted shell of the man lay no more by the window in
the upper story. The woman was free. "Rest at last,"
I thought, "for both of them."</p>

<p>But it was not as I thought.</p>

<p>I expected ease to come into the woman's drawn face,
and relaxation to her stooping figure. But something
else came upon both, something quite unwonted and inexplicable;
a wandering look in the eyes, a stupid drop to
the mouth, an uncertainty in her walk, as of one who is
half minded to go back and look for something. There
was, too, an irritating irregularity in the performance of
her work, which began to be annoying.</p>

<p>At last, on that October day, this new unreliability
reached the limit of provocation. I was leaving the city;
I needed my laundry, needed it at once; and here it was
four o'clock in the afternoon, the train due at night, and
packing impossible till the wash came. It was five days
overdue.</p>

<p>The wind was howling furiously, the rain driving in
sheets, but there was no alternative; I must get to the
"End of the Alley" and back, somehow.</p>

<p>The gray, rain-drenched atmosphere was still grayer
in the alley,—still, still grayer at the end. And what
with the gray of it and the rain of it, I could scarcely see
the thing that sat facing me when I opened the door,—a
sort of human blur, hunched in a rocking-chair, its
head sunken on its breast.</p>

<p>In response to my startled exclamation, the face was
lifted vacantly for a second, and then dropped again.
But I had seen: drunk, dead drunk!</p>

<p>And this woman had never drunk.</p>

<p>I looked around the wretched room. By the window,
where the gray light trailed in, stood a table covered with
unwashed dishes; some late flies were crawling in the
gutters of slop, besotted derelicts of insects, stupidly
staggering up and down the cracked china. On the
stove stood a number of flat-irons, but there was no fire.
A mass of unironed clothes lay on an old couch and over
the backs of two unoccupied chairs. On the wall above
the couch, hung the portrait of the dead man.</p>

<p>I walked to the slumping figure in the rocker, and with
ill-contained brutality demanded: "So this is why you
did not bring my clothes! Where are they?"</p>

<p>I heard my own voice cutting like the edge of a knife,
and felt half-ashamed when that weak, shaking thing
lifted up its foolish face, and stared at me with watery,
uncomprehending eyes.</p>

<p>"My clothes," I reiterated; "are they here or upstairs?"</p>

<p>"Guess-s-so," stammered the uncertain voice, "g-guess
so."</p>

<p>"Nothing for it but to find them myself," I muttered,
beginning the search through the pile on the couch.
Nothing of mine there, so I needs must climb to the
Golgotha on the second floor, from which the Cross had
disappeared, but which still bore traces of its victim's
long crucifixion,—a pair of old bed-slippers still by the
window, a sleeping-cap on the wall. Some cannot but
leave so the things that have touched their dead.</p>

<p>One by one I found the "rough-dry" garments, here,
there, in the hallway, in the garret, hanging or crumpled
up among dozens of others. And all the while I hunted,
the rain beat and the wind blew, and a low third sound
kept mingling with them, rising from the lower floor.
My heart smote me when I heard it, for I knew it was
the woman sobbing. The self-righteous Pharisee within
me gave an impatient sneer: "Alcohol tears!" But
something else clutched at my throat, and I found myself
glancing at the dead man's shoes.</p>

<p>When I went downstairs, I avoided the rocking-chair,
tied up my bundle, counted out the money, laid it on the
table, and then turning round said, deliberately and
harshly: "There is your money; don't buy whisky with
it, Mrs. Bossert."</p>

<p>Crying had a little sobered her. She looked up, still
with less light in her face than in an intelligent dog's, but
with some dim self-consciousness. It was as a face that
had appeared behind deforming bubbles of water. She
half lifted her hand, let it fall, and stammered, "No, I
won't, I won't. It don't do nobody no good."</p>

<p>The senseless desire to preach seized hold of me.
"Mrs. Bossert," I cried out, "aren't you ashamed of
yourself? A woman like you, who went through so
much, and so long, and so bravely! And now, when
you could get along all right, to act like this!"</p>

<p>The soggy mouth dropped open, the glazy eyes stared
at me, fixedly and foolishly, then shifted to the portrait
on the wall; and with a mawkish simper, as of some old
drab playing sixteen, she slobbered out, nodding to the
portrait: "All—for the love—o' him."</p>

<p>It was so utterly ludicrous that I laughed. Then a
cold rage took me: "Look here," I said (and again I
heard my own voice, grim and quiet, cutting the air like
a whip), "if you believe, as I have heard you say, that
your husband can look down on you from anywhere, remember
you couldn't do a thing to hurt him worse than
you're doing now. 'Love' indeed!"</p>

<p>The lash went home. The stricken figure huddled
closer; the voice came out like a dumb thing's moan:
"Oh—I'm all alone."</p>

<p>Then suddenly I understood. I had taken it for mockery,
and profanation, that leering look at the shadow on
the wall, that driveling stammer, "All—for the love—o'
him." And it had been a solemn thing! No lover's word
spoken in the morning of youth with the untried day
before it, under the seductive witchery of answering
breath and kisses, rushing blood and throbbing bodies;
but the word of a woman bent with service, seamed with
labor, haggard with watching; the word of a woman
who, at the washtub, had kept her sufferer by the work
of her hands, and watched him between the snatches of
her sleep. The immemorial passion of a common heart,
that <i>is</i> not much, that <i>had</i> not much, and has lost all.
Years were in it. For years she had had her burden to
carry; and she had carried it to the edge of the grave.
There it had fallen from her, and her arms were empty.
Nothing to do any more. Alone.</p>

<p>She sat up suddenly with a momentary flare of light in
her face.—"As long as I had him," she said, "I could do.
I thought I'd be glad when he was gone, a many and
many a time. But I'd rather he was up there yet....
I did everything. I didn't put him away mean.
There was a hundred and twenty-five dollars insurance.
I spent it all on him. He was covered with flowers."</p>

<p>The flare died down, and she fell together like a collapsing
bag. I saw the gray vacancy moving inward
toward the last spark of intelligence in her eyes, as an
ashing coal whitens inward toward the last dull red point
of fire. Then this heap of rags shuddered with an inhuman
whine, "A-l-o-n-e."</p>

<p>In the crowding shadows I felt the desolation pressing
me like a vise. Behind that sunken heap in the chair
gathered a midnight specter; for a moment I caught a
flash from its royal, malignant eyes, the Monarch of
human ruins, the murderous Bridegroom of widowed
souls, King Alcohol.</p>

<p>"After all, as well that way as another," I muttered;
and aloud (but the whip-cord had gone out of my
voice), "The money is on the table."</p>

<p>She did not hear me; the Bridegroom "had given His
Beloved Sleep."</p>

<p>I went out softly into the wild rain, and overhead,
among the lashing arms of the leafless trees, and around
the alley pocket, the wind was whining: "A-l-o-n-e."</p>






<h3><a id="To-Strive-and-Fail">To Strive and Fail</a></h3>


<p>There was a lonely wind crying around the house,
and wailing away through the twilight, like a
child that has been refused and gone off crying.
Every now and then the trees shivered with it, and
dropped a few leaves that splashed against the windows
like big, soft tears, and then fell down on the dark, dying
grass, and lay there till the next wind rose and whirled
them away. Rain was gathering. Close by the gray
patch of light within the room a white face bent over a
small table, and dust-dim fingers swept across the strings
of a zither. The low, pathetic opening chords of Albert's
"Herbst-Klage" wailed for a moment like the wind; then
a false note sounded, and the player threw her arms
across the table and rested her face upon them. What
was the use? She knew how it ought to be, but she
could never do it,—never make the strings strike true
to the song that was sounding within, sounding as the
wind and the rain and the falling leaves sounded it, as
long ago the wizard Albert had heard and conjured it
out of the sound-sea, before the little black notes that
carried the message over the world were written. The
weary brain wandered away over the mystery of the
notes, and she whispered dully, "A sign to the eye, and
a sound to the ear—and that is his gift to the world—his
will—and he is dead, dead, dead;—he was so great, and
they are so silly, those little black foolish dots—and yet
they are there—and by them his soul sings—"</p>

<p>The numb pain at her heart forced some sharp tears
from the closed eyes. She bent and unbent her fingers
hopelessly, two or three times, and then let them lie out
flat and still. It was not their fault, not the fingers'
fault; they could learn to do it, if they only had the
chance; but they could never, never have the chance.
They must always do something else, always a hundred
other things first, always save and spare and patch and
contrive; there was never time to do the thing she
longed for most. Only the odd moments, the unexpected
freedoms, the stolen half-hours, in which to live
one's highest dream, only the castaway time for one's
soul! And every year the fleeting glory waned, wavered,
sunk away more and more sorrowfully into the gray,
soundless shadows of an unlived life. Once she had
heard it so clearly,—long ago, on the far-off sun-spaced,
wind-singing fields of home,—the wild sweet choruses,
the songs no man had ever sung. Still she heard them
sometimes in the twilight, in the night, when she sat
alone and work was over; high and thin and fading,
only sound-ghosts, but still with the incomparable
glory of a first revelation, a song no one else has ever
heard, a marvel to be seized and bodied; only,—they
faded away into the nodding sleep that would conquer,
and in the light and rush of day were mournfully silent.
And she never captured them, never would; life was
half over now.</p>

<p>With the thought she started up, struck the chords
again, a world of plaint throbbing through the strings;
surely the wizard himself would have been satisfied. But
ah, once more the fatal uncertainty of the fingers....
She bit the left hand savagely, then touched it, softly
and remorsefully, with the other, murmuring: "Poor
fingers! Not your fault." At last she rose and stood at
the window, looking out into the night, and thinking of
the ruined gift, the noblest gift, that had been hers and
would die dumb; thinking of the messages that had
come to her up out of the silent dark and sunk back
into it, unsounded; of the voices she would have given
to the messages of the masters, and never would give
now; and with a bitter compression of the lips she said:
"Well, I was born to strive and fail."</p>

<p>And suddenly a rush of feeling swept her own life out
of sight, and away out in the deepening night she saw
the face of an old, sharp-chinned, white-haired, dead
man; he had been her father once, strong and young,
with chestnut hair and gleaming eyes, and with his own
dream of what he had to do in life. Perhaps he, too,
had heard sounds singing in the air, a new message
waiting for deliverance. It was all over now; he had
grown old and thin-faced and white, and had never done
anything in the world; at least nothing for himself, his
very own; he had sewn clothes,—thousands, millions of
stitches in his work-weary life—no doubt there were
still in existence scraps and fragments of his work,—in
same old ragbag perhaps—beautiful, fine stitches, into
which the keen eyesight and the deft hand had passed,
still showing the artist-craftsman. But <i>that</i> was not his
work; that was the service society had asked of him and
he had rendered; himself, his own soul, that wherein he
was different from other men, the unbought thing that
the soul does for its own outpouring,—that was nowhere.
And over there, among the low mounds of the
soldiers' graves, his bed was made, and he was lying
in it, straight and still, with the rain crying softly above
him. He had been so full of the lust of life, so alert, so
active! and nothing of it all!—"Poor father, you failed
too," she muttered softly.</p>



<p>And then behind the wraith of the dead man there
rose an older picture, a face she had never seen, dead
fifty years before; but it shone through the other face,
and outshone it, luminous with great suffering, much
overcoming, and complete and final failure. It was the
face of a woman not yet middle-aged, smitten with death,
with the horror of utter strangeness in the dying eyes;
the face of a woman lost in a strange city of a strange
land, and with her little crying, helpless children about
her, facing the inexorable agony there on the pavement,
where she was sinking down, and only foreign words
falling in the dying ears!—She, too, had striven; how
she had striven! Against the abyss of poverty there in
the old world; against the load laid on her by Nature,
Law, Society, the triune God of Terror; against the
inertia of another will. She had bought coppers with
blood, and spared and saved and endured and waited;
she had bent the gods to her will; she had sent her husband
to America, the land of freedom and promise; she
had followed him at last, over the great blue bitter water
with its lapping mouths that had devoured one of her
little ones upon the way; she had been driven like a cow
in the shambles at the landing stage; she had been robbed
of all but her ticket, and with her little children had
hungered for three days on the overland journey; she
had lived it through, and set foot in the promised land;
but somehow the waiting face was not there, had missed
her or she, him,—and lost and alone with Death and
the starving babes, she sank at the foot of the soldiers'
monument, and the black mist came down on the courageous
eyes, and the light was flickering out forever.
With a bitter cry the living figure in the room stretched
its hands toward the vision in the night. There was
nothing there, she knew it; nothing in the heavens above
nor the earth beneath to hear the cry,—not so much as a
crumbling bone any more,—but she called brokenly,
"Oh, why must she die so, with nothing, nothing, not
one little reward after all that struggle? To fall on the
pavement and die in the hospital at last!"</p>

<p>And shuddering, with covered eyes and heavy breath,
she added wearily, "No wonder that I fail; I come of
those who failed; my father, his mother,—and before
her?"</p>

<p>Behind the fading picture, stretched dim, long shadows
of silent generations, with rounded shoulders and bent
backs and sullen, conquered faces. And they had all,
most likely, dreamed of some wonderful thing they had
to do in the world, and all had died and left it undone.
And their work had been washed away, as if writ in
water, and no one knew their dreams. And of the fruit
of their toil other men had eaten, for that was the will
of the triune god; but of themselves was left no trace,
no sound, no word, in the world's glory; no carving upon
stone, no indomitable ghost shining from a written sign,
no song singing out of black foolish spots on paper,—nothing.
They were as though they had not been. And
as they all had died, she too would die, slave of the triple
Terror, sacrificing the highest to the meanest, that somewhere
in some lighted ball-room or gas-bright theater,
some piece of vacant flesh might wear one more jewel
in her painted hair.</p>

<p>"My soul," she said bitterly, "my soul for their diamonds!"
It was time to sleep, for to-morrow—WORK.</p>






<h3><a id="The-Sorrows-of-the-Body">The Sorrows of the Body</a></h3>


<p>I have never wanted anything more than the wild
creatures have,—a broad waft of clean air, a day
to lie on the grass at times, with nothing to do but
slip the blades through my fingers, and look as long as
I pleased at the whole blue arch, and the screens of green
and white between; leave for a month to float and float
along the salt crests and among the foam, or roll with my
naked skin over a clean long stretch of sunshiny sand;
food that I liked, straight from the cool ground, and time
to taste its sweetness, and time to rest after tasting;
sleep when it came, and stillness, that the sleep might
leave me when it would, not sooner—Air, room, light
rest, nakedness when I would not be clothed, and when
I would be clothed, garments that did not fetter; freedom
to touch my mother earth, to be with her in storm
and shine, as the wild things are,—this is what I wanted,—this,
and free contact with my fellows;—not to love,
and lie and be ashamed, but to love and say I love, and
be glad of it; to feel the currents of ten thousand years
of passion flooding me, body to body, as the wild things
meet. I have asked no more.</p>

<p>But I have not received. Over me there sits that pitiless
tyrant, the Soul; and I am nothing. It has driven
me to the city, where the air is fever and fire, and said,
"Breathe this;—I would learn; I cannot learn in the
empty fields; temples are here,—stay." And when my
poor, stifled lungs have panted till it seemed my chest
must burst, the Soul has said, "I will allow you, then,
an hour or two; we will ride, and I will take my book and
read meanwhile."</p>

<p>And when my eyes have cried out with tears of pain
for the brief vision of freedom drifting by, only for
leave to look at the great green and blue an hour, after
the long, dull-red horror of walls, the Soul has said, "I
cannot waste the time altogether; I must know! Read."
And when my ears have plead for the singing of the
crickets and the music of the night, the Soul has answered,
"No: gongs and whistles and shrieks are unpleasant
if you listen; but school yourself to hearken to the
spiritual voice, and it will not matter."</p>

<p>When I have beat against my narrow confines of brick
and mortar, brick and mortar, the Soul has said, "Miserable
slave! Why are you not as I, who in one moment
fly to the utterest universe? It matters not where you
are, <i>I</i> am free."</p>

<p>When I would have slept, so that the lids fell heavily
and I could not lift them, the Soul has struck me with a
lash, crying, "Awake! Drink some stimulant for those
shrinking nerves of yours! There is no time to sleep till
the work is done." And the cursed poison worked upon
me, till <i>Its</i> will was done.</p>

<p>When I would have dallied over my food, the Soul has
ordered, "Hurry, hurry! Do I have time to waste on this
disgusting scene? Fill yourself and be gone!"</p>

<p>When I have envied the very dog, rubbing its bare
back along the ground in the sunlight, the Soul has exclaimed,
"Would you degrade me so far as to put yourself
on a level with beasts?" And my bands were drawn
tighter.</p>

<p>When I have looked upon my kind, and longed to embrace
them, hungered wildly for the press of arms and
lips, the Soul has commanded sternly, "Cease, vile creature
of fleshly lusts! Eternal reproach! Will you forever
shame me with your beastliness?"</p>

<p>And I have always yielded: mute, joyless, fettered, I
have trod the world of the Soul's choosing, and served
and been unrewarded. Now I am broken before my
time; bloodless, sleepless, breathless,—half-blind, racked
at every joint, trembling with every leaf. "Perhaps I
have been too hard," said the Soul; "you shall have a
rest." The boon has come too late. The roses are beneath
my feet now, but the perfume does not reach me;
the willows trail across my cheek and the great arch is
overhead, but my eyes are too weary to lift to it; the
wind is upon my face, but I cannot bare my throat to its
caress; vaguely I hear the singing of the Night through
the long watches when sleep does not come, but the answering
vibration thrills no more. Hands touch mine—I
longed for them so once—but I am as a corpse. I remember
that I wanted all these things, but now the
power to want is crushed from me, and only the memory
of my denial throbs on, with its never-dying pain. And
still I think, if I were left alone long enough—but already
I hear the Tyrant up there plotting to slay me.—"Yes,"
it keeps saying, "it is about time! I will not be chained
to a rotting carcass. If my days are to pass in perpetual
idleness I may as well be annihilated. I will make
the wretch do me one more service.—You have clamored
to be naked in the water. Go now, and lie in it forever."</p>

<p>Yes: that is what It is saying, and I—the sea stretches
down there——</p>






<h3><a id="The-Triumph-of-Youth">The Triumph of Youth</a></h3>


<p>The afternoon blazed and glittered along the motionless
tree-tops and down into the yellow dust of
the road. Under the shadows of the trees, among
the powdered grass and bushes, sat a woman and a man.
The man was young and handsome in a way, with a
lean eager face and burning eyes, a forehead in the old
poetic mould crowned by loose dark waves of hair; his
chin was long, his lips parted devouringly and his glances
seemed to eat his companion's face. It was not a pretty
face, not even ordinarily good looking,—sallow, not
young, only youngish; but there was a peculiar mobility
about it, that made one notice it. She waved her hand
slowly from East to West, indicating the horizon, and
said dreamingly: "How wide it is, how far it is! One
can get one's breath. In the city I always feel that the
walls are squeezing my chest." After a little silence she
asked without looking at him: "What are you thinking
of, Bernard?"</p>

<p>"You," he murmured.</p>

<p>She glanced at him under her lids musingly, stretched
out her hand and touched his eyelids with her finger-tips,
and turned aside with a curious fleeting smile. He
caught at her hand, but failing to touch it as she drew it
away, bit his lip and forcedly looked off at the sky and
the landscape: "Yes," he said in a strained voice, "it is
beautiful, after the city. I wish we could stay in it."</p>

<p>The woman sighed: "That's what I have been wishing
for the last fifteen years."</p>

<p>He bent towards her eagerly: "Do you think—" he
stopped and stammered, "You know we have been planning,
a few of us, to club together and get a little farm
somewhere near—would you—do you think—would you
be one of us?"</p>

<p>She laughed, a little low, sad laugh: "I wouldn't be
any good, you know. I couldn't do the work that ought
to be done. I would come fast enough and I would try.
But I'm a little too old, Bernard. The rest are young
enough to make mistakes and live to make them good;
but when I would have my lesson learned, my strength
would be gone. It's half gone now."</p>

<p>"No, it isn't," burst out the youth. "You're worth half
a dozen of those young ones. Old, old—one would think
you were seventy. And you're not old; you will never
be old."</p>

<p>She looked up where a crow was wheeling in the air.
"If," she said slowly, following its motions with her
eyes, "you once plant your feet on my face, and you will,
you impish bird—my Bernard will sing a different song."</p>

<p>"No, Bernard won't," retorted the youth. "Bernard
knows his own mind, even if he is 'only a boy.' I don't
love you for your face, you—"</p>

<p>She interrupted him with a shrug and a bitter sneer.
"Evidently! Who would?"</p>

<p>A look of mingled pain and annoyance overspread his
features. "How you twist my words. You are beautiful
to me; and you know what I meant."</p>

<p>"Well," she said, throwing herself backward against
a tree-trunk and stretching out her feet on the grass,
ripples of amusement wavering through the cloudy expression,
"tell me what do you love in me."</p>

<p>He was silent, biting his lower lip.</p>

<p>"I'll tell you then," she said. "It's my energy, the life
in me. That is youth, and my youth has overlived its
time. I've had a long lease, but it's going to expire soon.
So long as you don't see it, so long as my life seems
fuller than yours—well—; but when the failure of life
becomes visible, while your own is still in its growth, you
will turn away. When my feet won't spring any more,
yours will still be dancing. And you will want dancing
feet with you."</p>

<p>"I will not," he answered shortly. "I've seen plenty of
other women; I saw all the crowd coming up this morning
and there wasn't a woman there to compare with
you. I don't say I'll never love others, but now I don't;
if I see another woman like you—But I never could
love one of those young girls."</p>

<p>"Sh—sh," she said glancing down the road where a
whirl of dust was making towards them, in the center
of which moved a band of bright young figures, "there
they come now. Don't they look beautiful?" There
were four young girls in front, their faces radiant with
sun and air, and daisy wreaths in their gleaming hair;
they had their arms around each other's waists and sang
as they walked, with neither more accord nor discord
than the birds about them. The voices were delicious
in their youth and joy; one heard that they were singing
not to produce a musical effect, but from the mere wish
to sing. Behind them came a troop of young fellows,
coats off, heads bare, racing all over the roadside, jostling
each other and purposely provoking scrambles. The tallest
one had a nimbus of bright curls crowning a glowing
face, dimpled and sparkling as a child's. The girls
glanced shyly at him under their lashes as he danced
about now in front and now behind them, occasionally
tossing them a flower, but mostly hustling his comrades
about. Behind these came older people with three or four
very little children riding on their backs.</p>

<p>As the group came abreast of our couple they
stopped to exchange a few words, then went on. When
they had passed out of hearing the woman sat with a
sphinx-like stare in her eyes, looking steadily at the
spot where the bright head had nodded to her as it
passed.</p>

<p>"Like a wildflower on a stalk," she murmured softly,
narrowing her eyes as if to fix the vision, "like a tall
tiger-lily."</p>

<p>Her companion's face darkened perceptibly. "What
do you mean? What do you see?" he asked.</p>

<p>"The vision of Youth and Beauty," she answered in the
tone of a sleep-walker, "and the glory and triumph of it,—the
immortality of it—its splendid indifference to its
ruined temples, and all its humble worshipers. Do
you know," turning suddenly to him with a sharp change
in face and voice, "what I would be wicked enough to
do, if I could?"</p>

<p>He smiled tolerantly: "You, wicked? Dear one, you
couldn't be wicked."</p>

<p>"Oh, but I could! If there were any way to fix Davy's
head forever, just as he passed us now,—forever, so that
all the world might keep it and see it for all time, I
would cut it off with this hand! Yes, I would." Her
eyes glittered mercilessly.</p>

<p>He shook his head smiling: "You wouldn't kill a bug,
let alone Davy."</p>

<p>"I tell you I would. Do you remember when
Nathaniel died? I felt bad enough, but do you know
the week before when he was so very sick, I went
out one day to a beautiful glen we used to visit together.
They had been improving it! they had improved it so
much that the water is all dying out of the creek; the
little boats that used to float like pond lilies lie all helpless
in the mud, and hardly a ribbon of water goes over
the fall, and the old giant trees are withering. Oh, it
hurt me so to think the glory of a thousand years was
vanishing before my eyes and I couldn't hold it. And
suddenly the question came into my head: 'If you had
the power would you save Nathaniel's life or bring back
the water to the glen?' And I didn't hesitate a minute.
I said, 'Let Nathaniel die and all my best loved ones and
I myself, but bring back the glory of the glen!"</p>

<p>"When I think," she went on turning away and becoming
dreamy again, "of all the beauty that is gone that
I can never see, that is lost forever—the beauty that had
to alter and die,—it stifles me with the pain of it. Why
must it all die?"</p>

<p>He looked at her wonderingly. "It seems to me," he
said slowly, "that beauty worship is almost a disease
with you. I wouldn't like to care so much for mere outsides."</p>

<p>"We never long for the thing we are rich in," she
answered in a dry, changed voice. Nevertheless his face
lighted, it was pleasant to be rich in the thing she worshiped.
He had gradually drawn near her feet and
now suddenly bent forward and kissed them passionately.
"Don't," she cried sharply, "it's too much like self-abasement.
And besides—"</p>

<p>His face was white and quivering, his voice choked.
"Well—what besides—"</p>

<p>"The time will come when you will wish you had reserved
that kiss for some other foot. Some one to whom
it will all be new, who will shudder with the joy of it,
who will meet you half way, who will believe all that
you say, and say like things in fullness of heart. And I
perhaps will see you, and know that in your heart you are
sorry you gave something to me that you would have
ungiven if you could."</p>

<p>He buried his face in his hands. "You do not love me
at all," he said. "You do not believe me."</p>

<p>A curious softness came into the answer: "Oh, yes,
dear, I believe you. Years ago I believed myself when
I said the same sort of thing. But I told you I am getting
old. I can not unmake what the years have made,
nor bring back what they have stolen. I love you <i>for
your face</i>", the words had a sting in them, "and for your
soul too. And I am glad to be loved by you. But, do
you know what I am thinking?"</p>

<p>He did not answer.</p>

<p>"I am thinking that as I sit here, beloved by you and
others who are young and beautiful—it is no lie—in a—well,
in a triumph I have not sought, but which I am
human enough to be glad of, envied no doubt by those
young girls,—I am thinking how the remorseless feet of
Youth will tramp on me soon, and carry you away. And"—very
slowly—"in my day of pain, you will not be near,
nor the others. I shall be alone; age and pain are unlovely."</p>

<p>"You won't let me come near you," he said wildly. "I
would do anything for you. I always want to do things
for you to spare you, and you never let me. When you
are in pain you will push me away."</p>

<p>A fairly exultant glitter flashed in her face. "Yes,"
she said, "I know my secret. That is how I have stayed
young so long. See," she said, stretching out her arms,
"other women at my age are past the love of men. Their
affections have gone to children. And I have broken the
law of nature and prolonged the love of youth because—I
have been strong and stood alone. But there is an end.
Things change, seasons change, you, I, all change; what's
the use of saying 'Never—forever, forever—never,' like
the old clock on the stairs? It's a big lie."</p>

<p>"I won't talk any more," he said, "but when the time
comes you will see."</p>

<p>She nodded: "Yes, I will see."</p>

<p>"Do you think all people alike?"</p>

<p>"As like as ants. People are vessels which life fills
and breaks, as it does trees and bees and other sorts of
vessels. They play when they are little, and then they
love and then they have children and then they die. Ants
do the same."</p>

<p>"To be sure. But I don't deceive myself as to the
scope of it."</p>

<p>The crowd were returning now, and by tacit consent
they arose and joined the group. Down the road they
jumped a fence into a field and had to cross a little
stream. "Where is our bridge?" called the boys. "We
made a bridge. Some one has stolen our bridge."</p>

<p>"Oh, come on," cried Davy, "let's jump it." Three ran
and sprang; they landed laughing and taunting the rest.
Bernard sought out his beloved. "Shall I help you
over?" he asked.</p>

<p>"No," she said shortly, "help the girls," and brushing
past him she jumped, falling a little short and muddying
a foot, but scrambling up unaided. The rest debated
seeking an advantageous point. At last they found a big
stone in the middle, and pulling off his shoes, Bernard
waded in the creek, helping the girls across. The smallest
one, large-eyed and timid, clung to his arm and let
him almost carry her over.</p>

<p>"He does it real natural," observed Davy, who was
whisking about in the daisy field like some flashing butterfly.</p>

<p>They gathered daisies and laughed and sang and chattered
till the sun went low. Then they gathered under a
big tree and spread their lunch on the ground. And
after they had eaten, the conversation lay between the
sallow-faced woman and one of the older men, a clever
conversation filled with quaint observations and curious
sidelights. The boys sat all about the woman questioning
her eagerly, but behind in the shadow of the drooping
branches sat the girls, silent, unobtrusive, holding each
other's hands. Now and then the talker cast a furtive
glance from Bernard's rather withdrawn face to the faces
in the shadow, and the enigmatic smile hovered and
flitted over her lips.</p>

<hr class="tb" />

<p>Three years later on the anniversary of that summer
day the woman sat at an upstairs window in the house on
the little farm that was a reality now, the little co-operative
farm where ten free men and women labored
and loved. She had come with the others and done her
best, but the cost of it, hard labor and merciless pain,
was stamped on the face that looked from the window.
She was watching Bernard's figure as it came swinging
through the orchard. Presently he came in and up the
stairs. His feet went past her door, then turned back
irresolutely, and a low knock followed. Her eyebrows
bent together almost sternly as she answered, "Come in."</p>

<p>He entered with a smile: "Can I do anything for you
this morning?"</p>

<p>"No," she said quietly, "you know I like my own
cranky ways. I—I'd rather do things myself." He nodded:
"I know. I always get the same answer. Shall
you go to the picnic? You surely will keep our foundation-day
picnic?"</p>



<p>"Perhaps—later. And perhaps not." There was a
curious tone of repression in the words.</p>

<p>"Well," he answered good-naturedly, "if you won't
let me do anything for you, I'll have to find some one who
will. Is Bella ready to go?"</p>

<p>"This half hour. Bella. Here is Bernard." And
Bella came in. Bella, the timid girl with the brilliant
complexion and gazelle soft eyes, Bella radiant in her
youth and feminine daintiness, more lovely than she had
been three years before.</p>

<p>She gave Bernard a lunch basket to carry and a shawl
and a workbag and a sun umbrella, and when they went
out she clung to his arm besides. She stopped near one
of their own rose bushes and told him to choose a bud
for her, and she put it coquettishly in her dark hair. The
woman watched them till they disappeared down the
lane; he had never once looked back. Then her mouth
settled in a quiet sneer and she murmured: "How long
is 'forever'? Three years." After a while she rose and
crossed to an old mirror that hung on the opposite wall.
Staring at the reflection it gave back, she whispered
drearily: "You are ugly, you are eaten with pain! Do
you still expect the due of youth and beauty? Did you
not know it all long ago?" Then something flashed in
the image, something as if the features had caught fire
and burned. "I will not," she said hoarsely, her fingers
clenching. "I will not surrender. Was it he I loved?
It was his youth, his beauty, his life. And younger youth
shall love me still, stronger life. I will not, I will not
die alive." She turned away and ran down into the yard
and out into the fields. She would not go on the common
highway where all went, she would find a hard way
through woods and over hills, and she would come there
before them and sit and wait for them where the ways
met. Bareheaded, ill-dressed and careless she ran along,
finding a fierce pleasure in trampling and breaking the
brush that impeded her. There was the road at last, and
right ahead of her an old, old man hobbling along with
bent back and eyes upon the ground. Just before him
was a bad hole in the road; he stopped, irresolute, and
looked around like a crippled insect stretching its antenna
to find a way for its mangled feet. She called cheerily,
"Let me help you." He looked up with dim blue
eyes helplessly seeking. She led him slowly around the
dangerous place, and then they sat down together on the
little covered wooden bridge beyond.</p>

<p>"Ah!" murmured the old man, shaking his head, "it
is good to be young." And there was the ghost of admiration
in his watery eyes, as he looked at her tall
straight figure.</p>

<p>"Yes," she answered sadly, looking away down the
road where she saw Bella's white dress fluttering, "it is
good to be young."</p>

<p>The lovers passed without noticing them, absorbed in
each other. Presently the old man hobbled away. "It
will come to that too," she muttered looking after him.
"The husks of life!"</p>






<h3><a id="The-Old-Shoemaker">The Old Shoemaker</a></h3>


<p>He had lived a long time there, in the house at the
end of the alley, and no one had ever known that
he was a great man. He was lean and palsied
and had a crooked back; his beard was grey and ragged
and his eyebrows came too far forward; there were seams
and flaps in the empty, yellow old skin, and he gasped
horribly when he breathed, taking hold of the lintel of
the door to steady himself when he stepped out on the
broken bricks of the alley. He lived with a frightful
old woman who scrubbed the floors of the rag-shop,
and drank beer, and growled at the children who poked
fun at her. He had lived with her eighteen years, she
said, stroking the furry little kitten that curled up in
her neck as if she had been beautiful.</p>

<p>Eighteen years they had been drinking and quarreling
together—and suffering. She had seen the flesh sucking
away from the bones, and the skin falling in upon
them, and the long, lean fingers growing more lean and
trembling, as they crooked round his shoemaking tools.</p>

<p>It was very strange she had not grown thin; the beer
had bloated her, and rolls of weak, shaking flesh lapped
over the ridges of her uncouth figure. Her pale, lack-lustre
blue eyes wandered aimlessly about as she talked:
No—he had never told her, not even in their quarrels,
not even when they were drunken together, of the great
Visitor who had come up the little alley, yesterday,
walking so stately over the sun-beaten bricks, taking
no note of the others, and coming in at the door without
asking. She had not expected such an one; how could
she? But the Old Shoemaker had shown no surprise
at the Mighty One. He smiled and set down the teacup
he was holding, and entered into communion with
the Stranger. He noticed no others, but continued to
smile; and the infinite dignity of the Unknown fell upon
him, and covered the wasted old limbs and the hard,
wizened face, so that all we who entered, bowed, and went
out, and did not speak.</p>

<p>But we understood, for the Mighty One gave understanding
without words. We had been in the presence
of Freedom! We had stood at the foot of Tabor, and
seen this worn, old, world-soiled soul lose all its dross
and commonplace, and pass upward smiling, to the Transfiguration.
In the hands of the Mighty One the crust
had crumbled, and dropped away in impalpable powder.
Souls should be mixed of it no more. Only that which
passed upward, the fine white playing flame, the heart
of the long, life-long watches of patience, should rekindle
there in the perennial ascension of the great Soul
of Man.</p>






<h3><a id="Where-the-White-Rose-Died">Where the White Rose Died</a></h3>


<p>It was late at night, a raw, rough-shouldering night,
that shoved men in corners as having no business
in the street, and the few people in the northbound
car drew themselves into themselves, radiating hedgehog
quills of feeling at their neighbors. Presently there came
in a curious figure, clothed in the drapery of its country's
honor, the blue flannel flapping very much about its legs.
I looked at its feet first, because they were so very small
and girlish, and because the owner of them adjusted
the flapping pants with the coquetry of a maiden switching
her skirts. Then I glanced at the hands: they also
were small and womanish, and constantly in motion. At
last, the face, expecting a fresh young boy's, not long
away from some country village. It was the sunk,
seamed face of a man of forty-five, seared, and with
iron-gray eyebrows, but lit by twinkling young eyes,
that gleamed at everything good-humoredly. The sailor's
pancake with its official lettering was pushed rakishly
down and forward, and looking at hat and wearer, one
instinctively turned milliner and decorated the "shape"
with aigrette and bows,—they would nod so accordant
with the flirting head. Presently the restless hands went
up and gave the hat another tilt, went down and straightened
the "divided skirt," folded themselves an instant
while the little feet began tattooing the car floor, and
the scintillant eyes looked general invitation all round
the car. No perceptible shrinkage of quills, however,
so the eyes wandered over to their image in the plate
glass, and directly the hat got another coquettish dip,
and the skirts another flirt and settle.</p>

<p>The conductor came in: some one to talk to at last!
"Will you let me off at Ninth and Race?"</p>

<p>The dim chill of a smile shivered over the other faces
in the car. Ninth and Race! Who ever heard a defender
of his country's glory ask a conductor on a street car in
Philadelphia for any other point than Ninth and Race!</p>

<p>The conductor nodded appreciatively. "Just come to
the city, I suppose," he said interlocutively.</p>

<p>The sailor plucked off his hat, exhibiting his label with
child-like vanity: "S. S. Alabama. Here for three days
just. Been over in New York."</p>

<p>"Like it?" remarked the conductor, prolonging his stay
inside the car.</p>

<p>The hat went on again, proudly. "Sixteen years in
the service. Yes, sir. <i>Six</i>-teen years. The service is all
right. The service is good enough for me. Live there.
Expect to die there. Sixteen years. You won't forget
to let me off at Ninth and Race."</p>

<p>"No. Going to see Chinatown?"</p>

<p>"Sure. Chinatown's all right. Seen it in Hong Kong.
Want to see it in Philadelphia."</p>

<p>O cradle of my country's freedom! These are your
defenders,—these to whom your chief delight is your
stews and your brothels, your fantans and your opium
dens, your sinks of filth and your cesspools of slime!
Let them only be as they were "at Hong Kong"—or
worse—and "the service" asks no more. He will live in
it and die in it, and it's good enough for him. Oh, not
your old-time patriotic legends, nor the halls of the
great Rebel Birth, nor the solemn, silent Bell that once
proclaimed liberty throughout the land, nor the piteous
relics of your dead wise men, nor any dream of your
bright, pure young days when yet you were "a fair
greene country towne," swims up in the vision of "the
service" when he sets his foot within your borders, filling
him with devotion to Our Lady Liberty, and drawing
him to New World pilgrim shrines. Not these, oh no,
not these. But your leper spot, your Old World plague-house,
your breeding-ground of pest-begotten human vermin!
So there is Chinatown, and electric glare enough
upon it, and rat-holes enough within it, "the service" is
good enough for him,—he will shoot to order in your
defense till he dies!</p>

<p>Rat-tat-tat went the little feet upon the floor, and the
pancake got another rakish pull. Presently the active
figure squared sharply about and faced the door. The
car had stopped, and a drunken man was staggering
in. The sailor caught him good-humoredly in his arms,
swung him about, and seated him beside himself with a
comforting "Now you're all right, sir; sit right here, my
friend."</p>

<p>The drunkard had a sodden, stupid face and bleary
eyes from which the alcohol was oozing. In his shaking
hand he held a bunch of delicate half-opened roses, hothouse
roses, cream and pink; the odor of them drifted
faintly through the car like a whiff of summer. Something
like a sigh of relaxation exhaled from the hedge-hogs,
and a dozen commiserating eyes were fastened on
the ill-fated flowers,—so fragile, so sweet, so inoffensive,
so wantonly sacrificed. The hot, unsteady, clutching
hand had already burned the stems, and the pale, helpless
faces of the roses drooped heavily.</p>

<p>The drunkard, full of beery effervescence, cast a bubbling
look over the car, and spying a young lady opposite,
suddenly stood up and offered the bouquet to her. She
stared resolutely through him, seeing and hearing nothing,
not even the piteous child-blossoms, with their
pleading, downbent heads, and with a confused muttering
of "No offense, no offense, you know," the man sank
back again. As he did so the uncertain fingers released
one stem, and a cream-white bloom went fluttering down,
like a butterfly with broken wings. There it lay, jolting
back and forth on the dirty floor, and no one dared to
pick it up.</p>

<p>Presently the drunkard sopped over comfortably on
the sailor's shoulder, who, with a generally directed wink
of bonhomie, settled him easily, bestowing a sympathetic
pat upon the bloated cheek. The conductor disturbed
the situation by asking for his fare. The drunkard stupidly
rubbed his eyes and offered his flowers in place
of the nickel. Again they were refused; and after a
fluctuant search in his pockets between intervals of nodding,
the dirty, over-fingered bit of metal was produced,
accepted—and still the dying blossoms shivered in the
torturer's hands.</p>

<p>He was drowsing off again, when, by some sudden
turn of the obstructed machinery in his skull, his lids
opened and he struggled up; the image of myself must
have swum suddenly across the momentarily acting eye-nerve,
and with gurgling deference, at the immanent risk
of losing his equilibrium once more, he proffered the
bouquet to me, grabbing the heads and presenting them
stem-end towards. A smothered snuffle went round the
car.</p>

<p>I wanted them, Oh, how I wanted them! My heart
beat suffocatingly with the sense of baffled pity and rage
and cowardice. Who was he, that drunken sot, with his
smirching, wabbling hand, that I should fear to take the
roses from him? Why must I grind my teeth and sit
there helpless, while those beautiful things were crushed
and blasted and torn in living fragments? I could take
them home, I could give them drink, they would lift up
their heads, they would open wide, for days they would
make the room sweet, and the pale, soft glory of their
inimitable petals would shine like a luminous promise
across the winter. Nobody wanted them, nobody cared;
this sodden beast in the flare-up of his consciousness
wished to be quit of them. <i>Why</i> might I not take them?
Something sharp bit and burned my eyelids as I glanced
at the one on the floor. The conductor had stepped on
it and crushed it open; and there lay the marvelous
creamy leaves, curled at their edges like kiss-seeking lips,
each with its glory greater than Solomon's, all fouled
and ruined in the human reek.</p>

<p>And I dared not save the others! Miserable coward!</p>

<p>I forced my hands tighter in my pockets and turned
my head away towards the outside night and the backward
slipping street. Between me and it, a dim reflection
wavered, the image of the thing that stood there
before me; and somewhere, like a far-off, dulled bell, I
heard the words, "And God created man in his own image,
in the image of God created He him." The sailor,
no doubt with the kindly intention of relieving me from
annoyance, and not averse to play with anything, made
pretence of seizing the roses. Then the drunkard, in an
abandon of generosity, began tearing off the blossoms by
the heads, scrutinizing, and casting each away as unfit
for the exalted service of his "friend," till the latter
reaching out managed to get hold of a white one with
a stem. He trimmed its sheltering green carefully,
brought out a long black pin, stuck it through the stalk,
and fastened the pale shining head against his dark blue
blouse. All hedgehoggery smiled. We had thrust the
roses through with our forbidding quills,—what matter
that a barbarian nail crucified this last one? The drunkard
slept again, limply holding his scattering bunch of
headless stems and torn foliage. Pink and cream the
petals strewed the floor. Where was the loving hand
that had nursed them to bloom in this hard, unwonted
weather; loved and nursed and—<i>sold</i> them?</p>

<p>"Ninth and Race," sang out the conductor. The sailor
sprang up with a merry grin, bowed gaily to everyone,
twinkled his fingers in the air with a blithe "Ta ta; I'm
off for Chinatown," as he slid through the door, and was
away in a trice, tripping down to the pestiferous sink
that was awaiting him somewhere. And on his breast he
wore the pallid flower that had offered its stainless beauty
to me, that I had loved,—and had not loved enough to
save. The rest were dead; but that one—somewhere
down there in a den where even the gas-choked lights
were leering like prostitutes' eyes, down there in that
trough of swill and swine, that pure, still thing had yet
to die.</p>
