<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>VII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-7" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3><a id="The-Sorrows-of-the-Body">The Sorrows of the Body</a></h3>


<p>I have never wanted anything more than the wild
creatures have,—a broad waft of clean air, a day
to lie on the grass at times, with nothing to do but
slip the blades through my fingers, and look as long as
I pleased at the whole blue arch, and the screens of green
and white between; leave for a month to float and float
along the salt crests and among the foam, or roll with my
naked skin over a clean long stretch of sunshiny sand;
food that I liked, straight from the cool ground, and time
to taste its sweetness, and time to rest after tasting;
sleep when it came, and stillness, that the sleep might
leave me when it would, not sooner—Air, room, light
rest, nakedness when I would not be clothed, and when
I would be clothed, garments that did not fetter; freedom
to touch my mother earth, to be with her in storm
and shine, as the wild things are,—this is what I wanted,—this,
and free contact with my fellows;—not to love,
and lie and be ashamed, but to love and say I love, and
be glad of it; to feel the currents of ten thousand years
of passion flooding me, body to body, as the wild things
meet. I have asked no more.</p>

<p>But I have not received. Over me there sits that pitiless
tyrant, the Soul; and I am nothing. It has driven
me to the city, where the air is fever and fire, and said,
"Breathe this;—I would learn; I cannot learn in the
empty fields; temples are here,—stay." And when my
poor, stifled lungs have panted till it seemed my chest
must burst, the Soul has said, "I will allow you, then,
an hour or two; we will ride, and I will take my book and
read meanwhile."</p>

<p>And when my eyes have cried out with tears of pain
for the brief vision of freedom drifting by, only for
leave to look at the great green and blue an hour, after
the long, dull-red horror of walls, the Soul has said, "I
cannot waste the time altogether; I must know! Read."
And when my ears have plead for the singing of the
crickets and the music of the night, the Soul has answered,
"No: gongs and whistles and shrieks are unpleasant
if you listen; but school yourself to hearken to the
spiritual voice, and it will not matter."</p>

<p>When I have beat against my narrow confines of brick
and mortar, brick and mortar, the Soul has said, "Miserable
slave! Why are you not as I, who in one moment
fly to the utterest universe? It matters not where you
are, <i>I</i> am free."</p>

<p>When I would have slept, so that the lids fell heavily
and I could not lift them, the Soul has struck me with a
lash, crying, "Awake! Drink some stimulant for those
shrinking nerves of yours! There is no time to sleep till
the work is done." And the cursed poison worked upon
me, till <i>Its</i> will was done.</p>

<p>When I would have dallied over my food, the Soul has
ordered, "Hurry, hurry! Do I have time to waste on this
disgusting scene? Fill yourself and be gone!"</p>

<p>When I have envied the very dog, rubbing its bare
back along the ground in the sunlight, the Soul has exclaimed,
"Would you degrade me so far as to put yourself
on a level with beasts?" And my bands were drawn
tighter.</p>

<p>When I have looked upon my kind, and longed to embrace
them, hungered wildly for the press of arms and
lips, the Soul has commanded sternly, "Cease, vile creature
of fleshly lusts! Eternal reproach! Will you forever
shame me with your beastliness?"</p>

<p>And I have always yielded: mute, joyless, fettered, I
have trod the world of the Soul's choosing, and served
and been unrewarded. Now I am broken before my
time; bloodless, sleepless, breathless,—half-blind, racked
at every joint, trembling with every leaf. "Perhaps I
have been too hard," said the Soul; "you shall have a
rest." The boon has come too late. The roses are beneath
my feet now, but the perfume does not reach me;
the willows trail across my cheek and the great arch is
overhead, but my eyes are too weary to lift to it; the
wind is upon my face, but I cannot bare my throat to its
caress; vaguely I hear the singing of the Night through
the long watches when sleep does not come, but the answering
vibration thrills no more. Hands touch mine—I
longed for them so once—but I am as a corpse. I remember
that I wanted all these things, but now the
power to want is crushed from me, and only the memory
of my denial throbs on, with its never-dying pain. And
still I think, if I were left alone long enough—but already
I hear the Tyrant up there plotting to slay me.—"Yes,"
it keeps saying, "it is about time! I will not be chained
to a rotting carcass. If my days are to pass in perpetual
idleness I may as well be annihilated. I will make
the wretch do me one more service.—You have clamored
to be naked in the water. Go now, and lie in it forever."</p>

<p>Yes: that is what It is saying, and I—the sea stretches
down there——</p>






		</section>
	</body>
</html>
